docs/installation.rst, before:

Installation
============

Requirements
------------

Before you install BUTTON, make sure that PGPLOT (version 5.1.0 or above) is
already installed in your system.  Some details about how I do typically
install PGPLOT under ``Linux`` and ``Mac OS X`` are given `here
<https://guaix.fis.ucm.es/~ncl/howto/howto-pgplot>`_.

**Button** Installation
-----------------------

To install **Button** you need to perform the following steps:


1.- Download the latest distribution from github:

::

    $ git clone https://github.com/nicocardiel/button

2.- Enter into the directory ``button`` and prepare the code to be compiled

::

   $ autoreconf -s -i -f
   $ ./configure

.. note:: Mac users can easily indicate a different Fortran compiler using, for
   example, ``./configure FC=gfortran-mp-12``.

3.- Compile the code:

::

   $ make

4.- Check that the sample program works:

::

   $ src/samplebutton
   ...

5.- (Optional) Install the library in the system:

::

   $ sudo make install

C version
---------

A reduced C version of **Button** if also available
:download:`here<aux/cbutton.tar.gz>` (use it at your own risk!).

Commit message:

Include defining the C compiler to help configure to find PGPLOT

docs/installation.rst, after:

Installation
============

Requirements
------------

Before you install BUTTON, make sure that PGPLOT (version 5.1.0 or above) is
already installed in your system.  Some details about how I do typically
install PGPLOT under ``Linux`` and ``Mac OS X`` are given `here
<https://guaix.fis.ucm.es/~ncl/howto/howto-pgplot>`_.

**Button** Installation
-----------------------

To install **Button** you need to perform the following steps:


1.- Download the latest distribution from github:

::

    $ git clone https://github.com/nicocardiel/button

2.- Enter into the directory ``button`` and prepare the code to be compiled

::

   $ autoreconf -s -i -f
   $ ./configure

.. note:: Mac users can easily indicate a different Fortran compiler using, for
   example, ``./configure FC=gfortran-mp-13 CC=gcc-mp-13`` (note that the
   associated C compiler is also provided).

3.- Compile the code:

::

   $ make

4.- Check that the sample program works:

::

   $ src/samplebutton
   ...

5.- (Optional) Install the library in the system:

::

   $ sudo make install

C version
---------

A reduced C version of **Button** if also available
:download:`here<aux/cbutton.tar.gz>` (use it at your own risk!).
